## Introduction

The fine architecture of cells can be investigated by cryo-electron tomography (cryo-ET) [@doi:10.1016/j.jmb.2021.167187].
Cellular structures are preserved down to the atomic scale through vitrification and observation of the samples in a fully hydrated state.
When a macromolecule is present in a sufficient number of copies in the cells imaged by cryo-ET, it is possible to obtain its atomic structure in situ using subtomogram averaging [@doi:10.1101/2022.01.10.475481; @doi:10.1038/s41596-021-00648-5].
Cellular cryo-ET datasets are usually extremely complex, making them difficult to analyze. 
This is aggravated by the sensitivity of biological samples to electron radiation, which limits the signal-to-noise ratio in cryo-ET datasets [@doi:10.1146/annurev.biochem.73.011303.074112].
Tomographic reconstructions are generated from a series of images of the sample acquired at different viewing angles.
The geometry of the samples prevents acquisition at certain angles, resulting in anisotropic spatial coverage.
The resolution in the directions close to the axis of the electron beam incident on the untilted sample is strongly reduced. 
This effect, commonly referred to as the missing-wedge artifact, further complicates data analysis. 
In particular, organelles fully bounded by a membrane appear to have holes at their top and bottom (relative to the electron beam axis) [@doi:10.1146/annurev.biochem.73.011303.074112].

The synapse is a specialized cellular contact at which information is transmitted from a neuron to another, the presynaptic and postsynaptic synapses, respectively. 
In most cases, the signal is transmitted by the release of neurotransmitters into the intercellular space.
Neurotransmitters are stored in SVs and are released following the fusion of an SV with the presynaptic plasma membrane.
A synapse contains hundreds of SVs and their mobility and recruitability for neurotransmitter release depends on inter-vesicle interactions through so-called connector structures [@doi:10.1083/jcb.200908082;@doi:10.15252/embr.202255719;@10.1016/j.sbi.2019.01.008;@10.1016/j.yjsbx.2022.100067]. 
The characterization of these interactions can be performed automatically with the Pyto software, which implements a hierarchical connectivity approach to segment connectors [@doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2016.10.004]. 
For accurate connector segmentation, precise segmentation of SVs is a prerequisite.
To date, SV segmentation has been performed manually, but given the large number of SVs per dataset, it is an extremely time-consuming process. 
Typically, one person spends 3 to 8 working days segmenting a single dataset.
Attempts to perform this task automatically based on classical computer vision algorithms have not yielded sufficiently accurate results [@doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2014.02.015].  
To alleviate this situation, we decided to develop an approach based on deep learning.

Convolutional neural networks (CNN) have been successfully employed to segment cryo-ET data [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.4405]. 
Although sufficient for visualization purposes, this approach does not yield segmentations of tethers and connectors that are accurate enough for further processing in Pyto.
Later on, Imbrosci et al. described accurate SV segmentation of transmission electron microscopy images using CNN, but this approach is limited to 2-dimensional (2D) images of resin-embedded synapses [@doi:10.1523/ENEURO.0400-20.2021].
In the first study, cryo-ET data are decomposed in individual 2D slices, which are handed as separate inputs to the CNN. 
The independent output 2D prediction images are then reassembled in a 3-dimensional (3D) stack [@doi:10.1038/nmeth.4405].
As discussed above, membranes oriented approximately parallel to the plane of the 2D tomographic images are not resolved.
In the absence of contextual knowledge of the other 2D images, the CNN fails to segment these regions of the vesicles.
Hence, spherical vesicles appear open, whereas we expect closed spherical objects.
Recently Zhou et al. addressed this issue by implementing a downstream fitting step based on a Gaussian process approach, allowing for the smooth closure of the membranes [@doi:10.1016/j.jocs.2022.101904].
Ideally, 3D networks should be used to segment 3D cryo-ET data.
In this context, several groups have published applications of 3D networks in cryo-ET for other tasks, such as particle picking and classification, in order to perform subtomogram averaging [@10.1038/s41592-022-01746-2;@10.1038/s41592-021-01275-4;@10.1016/j.cmpb.2022.106990]. 
However, these papers have not focused on accurately segmenting membranes in cryo-ET data.

We opted to employ a 3D U-Net CNN to process 3D images as input [@arxiv:1606.06650]. 
Weigert et al. [@doi:10.1038/s41592-018-0216-7] implemented a U-Net for content-aware restoration (CARE) of 3D fluorescence microscopy datasets.
They showed that it can restore information from anisotropic and very noisy datasets.
Such networks have been used in the last couple of years in cryo-ET analysis, mainly to perform denoising and object detection [@arxiv:1810.05420;@doi:10.1038/s41592-021-01275-4;@doi:10.1038/s41592-022-01746-2]. 
We implemented a 3D U-Net based on CARE building blocks and trained it with manually segmented datasets. 
This method provided good accuracy and was not strongly affected by the missing wedge artifact. 
Nevertheless, it was not sufficient for our downstream Pyto analysis.
Hence, we developed a post-processing method, which transforms the segmented objects into spheres and refines their radius and center location.
The workflow includes outlier detection based on the radial profile features of the segmented objects.
Then, these mis-segmented vesicles can be either removed or refined.
This leads to a substantial improvement in accuracy, which is reflected in Pyto performances comparable to those obtained after manual SV segmentation.
We also introduce a semi-automatic method to quickly fix wrongly segmented or missed SVs.

Although our set of procedures was developed with the use case of SV segmentation in mind, it can be used to segment any other types of biological spherical vesicles, such as transport vesicles, secretory vesicles, endocytic vesicles, and extracellular vesicles. 
Furthermore, with only small modifications it could be extended to extremely accurate segmentation of other membrane-bound organelles or to the plasma membrane.
