## Materials and methods

### Cryo-electron tomography datasets
They consisted in rat synaptosomes primary neuron cultures derived from mice.
In this study, we used datasets originating from either rat synaptosomes or mouse primary neuron cultures.
They represent a total of 30 tomograms with heterogeneous pixel sizes, defocus and resolution and we split them in three groups:
1. Train set: 9 synaptosome tomograms were used for training.
2. Test set: 9 independent synaptosome tomograms were used for testing.
3. Generalization test set: 12 neuron tomograms were used for assessing transfer learning potential.
The preparation procedure of the samples from which the datasets were obtained as well as the biological analysis of these datasets was previously reported [@doi:10.1101/2022.03.07.483217].

### Manual segmentation and automatic interboundary segment detection
Manual segmentation of SVs, the presynaptic cytoplasm, and the active zone plasma membrane was done in IMOD [@10.1006/jsbi.1996.0013]. 
SVs were segmented as spheres.
The presynaptic cytoplasm marked the region to be analyzed by Pyto [@doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2016.10.004].
Later on, we refer to this region as the cytoplasmic segmentation region.
It consisted of the volume comprising the active zone and the cluster of SVs. 
The analysis by Pyto was essentially the same as described previously [@doi:10.1083/jcb.200908082; @doi:10.1016/j.jsb.2016.10.004].
In short, the segmented region is divided in 1 voxel thick layers parallel to the active zone for distance calculations.
A hierarchical connectivity segmentation detects densities interconnecting boundaries.
The boundaries were synaptic vesicles and the active zone plasma membrane. 
Detected intervesicular segments are termed connectors and segments connecting vesicles to the active zone plasma membrane are called tethers.
Distance calculations respective to SVs were done from SV center.
The segmentation procedure is conservative and tends to miss some tethers and connectors because of noise.
Consequently, the numbers of tethers and connectors should not be considered as absolute values, but rather to compare experimental groups.
As it was done before, an upper limit was set between 2100 and 3200 nm^3^ on segment volume.
The tomograms that were used for this analysis were binned by a factor of 2 to 3, resulting in voxel sizes between 2.1 and 2.4 nm.

### Train and validation set generation
In the preparation of our train set, we utilized segmented 3D image volumes.
The primary volume was systematically divided into 32^3^ cubic sub-volumes.
To ensure the relevance and richness of the data, only those sub-volumes that were sufficiently occupied by vesicles, specifically containing more than 1000 voxels, were retained.
860 sub-volumes were used for training and 100 sub-volumes were used for validation.

### Network architecture and training procedure
We used a U-Net with two downsampling stages and two convolutional layers per stages, with a kernel size of 3, and ReLU activation function based on the open-source CARE framework (Figure {@fig:pipeline}) [@doi:10.1038/s41592-018-0216-7].
We used the Adam optimizer on a binary cross-entropy loss function.
The learning progress was tracked by calculating the Dice coefficient and the loss value after each training epoch (Figure {@fig:dice}).
The Dice coefficient for the train set was initially ~0.25 and rose to over 0.9 after approximately 50 epochs, while for the validation set, it increased to 0.8. 
The loss for the train set went from 0.55 and to values below 0.05 after 50 epochs while for the validation set it went from 1 and to slightly below 0.3 after the initial 50 epochs and then rose slightly.
The training was done for 200 epochs.

### Probability map construction
Our U-Net model, trained on 32^3^-voxel patches, utilizes a 24-voxel region of interest (ROI).
To mitigate tiling effects during testing, the network input can be expanded to larger volume like 64 voxels.
The tomogram undergoes padding to align with the ROI, ensuring reduced edge artifacts.
Segmentation is executed in tiles, where the U-Net predicts the synaptic vesicle probability for each tile.
Only the central part of the segmented patch, corresponding to the ROI, is retained.
Finally, the segmented tiles are reassembled, yielding a continuous synaptic vesicle probability map of the entire volume.

### Global thresholding
Segmenting implies turning the probability map into a binary mask.
In order to find the optimal threshold value, we iterated through potential threshold values ranging from 0.8 to 1 in increments of 0.01.
A binary mask was generated for each threshold.
Subsequently, an erosion operation was applied to the binary mask, and the difference between the original and eroded masks produced the vesicle shell.
The voxel intensity values of the original image corresponding to this shell were recorded for each threshold.
We minimized the average intensity of the shell voxels to determine the optimal threshold value, since the shell of correctly segmented vesicles corresponds to the vesicle membrane, which in cryo-ET appears darker, i.e., with lower intensity values.

### Adaptative local thresholding
Each individual segment was given a label using the `scikit-image label` method [@doi:10.7717/peerj.453].
A majority of vesicles were correctly segmented but we noticed some segments included more than one vesicle.
We therefore evaluated each segment with two criteria based on the fact that synaptic vesicles have a homogenous size and are spherical. 
Firstly we calculated the volume z-score $z$ for each segment:
$$z(S_i) = \frac{V(S_i) - \mu}{\sigma}$$ {#eq:z-score-volume}
where $S_i$ is the segment $i$, $V(S_i)$ is the volume of $S_i$, $\mu$ the average volume of all segments, and $\sigma$ the standard deviation of the segment volumes.
Secondly, we computed the segment extent $e$ as:
$$e(S_i) = \frac{V(S_i)}{B(S_i)}$$ {#eq:extent}
where $B(S_i)$ is the volume of segment $i$ bounding box.
The extent of a sphere equals $\frac{\pi}{6}$.
Segments with both a z-score $z > 1$ and an extent $e < 0.25$ were considered as potentially comprising more than one vesicle.
For each of these segments, the threshold was increased stepwise until two distinct segments were generated.
Subsequently, the extent and volume of all segments was evaluated again. Any segment with $e < 0.25$, or $e > 0.75$, or $V < k$ was discarded. 
$k$ was defined as the volume of a sphere with a radius of 12 nm.
This ensured that segments deviating highly from spherical shape and segments with a volume smaller than an acceptable volume $k$ were removed.

### Segmentation refinement using radial profile
Even if most synaptic vesicles were detected and well segmented, segmentation accuracy was not sufficient for our downstream application.
To improve accuracy, each segment was converted to a spherical segment and its radius and position was refined.
Initial spherical conversion was done by setting the center of the sphere $C$ at the position of the centroid of the segment, while the radius $r$ was defined as half the length of the bounding box longest edge. 
The segment position and radius were iteratively refined as follows.

1. The radial average $\langle I(d)\rangle$ was computed:
$$\langle I(d)\rangle = \frac{1}{4\pi ^2 r^2} \int_{0}^{2\pi}\int_{0}^{2\pi}I(d,\theta ,\phi) \, d\phi \, d\theta$$ {#eq:radial_average}
where $d$ is the radial distance from the segment center, $\theta$ the polar angle, and $\phi$ the azimuthal angle.

2. The radius of the vesicle $r$ was updated as:
$$r = d_m + \frac{t_m}{2}$$ {#eq:vesicle_radius}
where $d_m$ is the radial distance of center of the vesicle membrane, and $t_m$ the thickness of the vesicle membrane.
$d_m$ was defined as the radial distance for which the radial average was minimal.
$\frac{t_m}{2}$ was calculated as the distance between the center of the vesicle membrane and the minimum of the second derivative of the radial profile in the interval between the center of the vesicle membrane and the maximum of the Fresnel fringe outside the membrane.

3. The radial average was back projected in 3-dimension:
$$I(x,y,z) =  \langle I(\sqrt{x^2+y^2+z^2})\rangle$$ {#eq:3d-average}
where $(x,y,z)=(0,0,0)$ is the coordinate of the segment center.

4. We computed by cross-correlation the shift between the obtained 3-D average and the 3-D image in the cubic box with central coordinates $C$ and edge length $l = 2r + c$, where $c$ is a constant.
$C$ was updated by subtraction of the shift.

5. Steps 1 to 4 were repeated for a maximum of 10 iterations until convergence or until a total shift of $\frac{1}{2}\sqrt{3l_o^2}$, where $l_o$ is the edge length of the initial box. 
The feature space of predicted vesicle labels was computed, containing membrane thickness $t_m$, membrane intensity $\rho$, and vesicle radius $r$.
$\rho$ was defined as the mean intensity of the radial average within the radial distance interval $[d_m - \frac{t_m}{2}\,,\,d_m + \frac{t_m}{2}]$.

### Outlier detection and refinement
Following radial profile calculation, key features, namely thickness, radius, and membrane intensity, were extracted.
Using these criteria, the Mahalanobis distance $D^2$ was calculated for each data point to quantify its distance from the distribution of these features as follows, using Scipy's implementation [@doi:10.1038/s41592-020-0772-5]:
$$D^2 = (\mathbf{x} - \boldsymbol{\mu})^\top \mathbf{S}^{-1} (\mathbf{x} - \boldsymbol{\mu})$$ {#eq:mahalanobis-distance}
where $\mathbf{x}$ is the vector of the three features, $\boldsymbol{\mu}$ is the mean vector of the features, and $\mathbf{S}^{-1}$ is the inverse covariance matrix of the features.
The significance of the Mahalanobis distance was interpreted as follows:
$$p = 1 - \text{CDF}_{\chi^2}(D^2, \nu)$$ {#eq:p-value}
where $\text{CDF}_{\chi^2}$ is the cumulative distribution function of the chi-squared distribution, and $\nu$ is the number of degrees of freedom, which is equal to the number of features - 1.
The resulting p-value provides a measure of the statistical significance of each data point's distance (Figure @fig:outlier).

With the computed p-values, outlier detection and refinement were conducted.
Each vesicle with a p-value lower than a given threshold was defined as an outlier.
In this study, we empirically set the threshold to 0.3, but other values can be used, depending on the use case.
The radial profile and p-value of the outliers was recalculated using a different box size.
We performed this step iteratively.
At each iteration the box size was made larger by 2x2x2 voxels.
For each outlier, the iteration stopped when its p-value was higher than the threshold.
A maximum of 10 iterations was performed.
Vesicles that did not meet the p-value criteria were removed from the dataset.

### Evaluation Metrics
The evaluation framework was designed to assess the capabilities of the proposed toolbox for automatic synaptic vesicle segmentation.
We defined as ground truth the manual segmentation of synaptic vesicles.
Evaluation was peformed within the cytoplasmic segmentation region (see "Manual segmentation and automatic interboundary segment detection").
We performed per vesicle evaluation and voxel-wise evaluation.
For the former, we defined a vesicle as correctly segmented if the center of the predicted vesicle was located inside the ground truth vesicle.
Based on that we calculated an F1 score.
For the voxel-wise evaluation, we calculated the Dice coefficient between prediction and the ground truth.

#### Voxel-wise evaluation
During training a Dice coefficient for probabilistic subvolume maps was calculated after each epoch as a performance quantification {@fig:dice}.
After reconstructing the probablility map after training or prediction, we employed the Dice metric for the whole tomogram to evaluate the similarity of the predicted probability mask with ground truth {@tbl:train-tomograms},{@tbl:test-tomograms}, and {@tbl:neuron-tomograms}. 
The Dice coefficient is defined as:

$$1-\frac{2\sum_{voxels} y_{true} y_{pred}}{\sum_{voxels} y_{true}^2+\sum_{voxels} y_{pred}^2}$$ {#eq:dice}

where $y_{true}$ and $y_{pred}$ are the ground truth and predicted probability values, respectively, for each voxel.

The Dice coefficient was also employed to monitor all stages of post-processing of the labels, to observe the effect of each post-processing step.

#### Vesicle diameter and position deviation
In addition to the F1-score, we also evaluated the precision of our segmentation by calculating the deviation of the estimated vesicle diameter and position from the ground truth.
Given the diameter of a ground-truth manually segmented vesicles $d_{GTi}$ and the predicted diameters of the same vesicles $d_{Pi}$, the average deviation in diameter estimation across all vesicles can be expressed as $\delta_d$, where $\delta_d$ is calculated as:
$$\delta_d = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} \left( 1 - \frac{\min(dPi, dGTi)}{\max(dPi, dGTi)} \right)$$ {#eq:delta_d-equation}
Here, n represents the total number of vesicles, $dPi$ is the diameter of i-th vesicle predicted by the segmentation, and $dGTi$ is the diameter of the i-th vesicle in the ground truth.
This formula offers an insight into the congruence between our estimated diameter and the manual segmentation, with a diminished value of $\delta d$ signifying a closer approximation.

Similarly, the average deviation in position estimation across all vesicles can be expressed as $\Delta_c$.
It corresponds to the average euclidean distance between the center of ground truth vesicles and the center of predicted vesicles.

### Statistical comparison
Multiple pairwise ANOVA comparisons with Benjamini-Hochberg correction were performed on the Dice values summarized in {@tbl:dice-statistics} to assess the statistical significance of the differences between the Dice values [@doi:10/gfpkdx].
We performed Benjamini-Hochberg correction with the _multipletests_ function implemented in the Python module _statsmodels_ [@doi:10.25080/Majora-92bf1922-011].
A list of P-values resulting form pairwise comparisons was input, and _multipletests_ output a list of corrected P-values.
The used implementation of the Benjamini-Hochberg correction does not require a false discovery rate to be input. 
This variation of the original Benjamini-Hochberg correction algorithm was proposed by Yekutieli and Benjamini [@doi:10/ctfdqf].
If a corrected P-value is smaller than the defined acceptable false discovery rate, then the null hypothesis is rejected, i.e. the difference is considered statistically significant.
This algorithm enables to test multiple false discovery rates in one step and its conclusions are exactly the same as the original Benjamini-Hochberg correction algorithm run multiple times with different false discovery rates.

### Computational Setup
All experiments were conducted using 4 x NVIDIA 2080 Ti GPUs with CUDA 10.1.
The software environment was set up with Python 3.
Key libraries and packages used include TensorFlow 2.4.1 with GPU support and Keras 2.4.3.
Image visualization was achieved with UCSF ChimeraX [@doi:10.1002/pro.4792] and Amira 2022.2 (Thermofisher Scientific).
Surface rendering was performed by the volume tracer and color zone in UCSF ChimeraX.

### Manuscript preparation
The manuscript was written with the open and collaborative scientific writing package Manubot [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1007128]. 
The source code and data for this manuscript are available at <https://github.com/aseedb/synaptic_tomo_ms>.

### Code availability
CryoVesNet is available on GitHub at <https://github.com/Zuber-group/CryoVesNet>
